'\"
.TH catclose @MAN3EXT@ 21-Jun-2007 MinGW "MinGW Programming Reference
.
.SH NAME
.B catclose
\- close a national language message catalogue.
.
.\" Copyright (C) 2007,  Keith Marshall.
.
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this manpage
.\" under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
.\" or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation, with
.\" no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
.\" A copy of the license is included in the accompanying file, `FDL'.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR #include
.RB < nl_types.h >
.LP
.BR "int catclose" ( nl_catd\c
.IR catd )
.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Requires linking with the
.B \-lcatgets
library option.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR catclose ()
function closes the national language message catlogue,
associated with the descriptor
.I catd
by a preceding call to
.BR catopen (@MAN3EXT@),
and frees all resources allocated to it.
.
.SH RETURN VALUE
On successfully closing
.IR catd ,
.BR catclose ()
returns zero;
on failure it returns
.BR -1 ,
and
.I errno
is set to
.BR EBADF .
.
.SH CONFORMING TO
POSIX 1003.1-2001.
.
.SH CAVEATS AND BUGS
POSIX specifies a further possible error return case,
with
.I errno
set to
.BR EINTR ;
this case should not occur on MS\(hyWindows\*(Tm hosts.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR catopen (@MAN3EXT@).
.
.SH AUTHOR
Copyright \(co 2007, Keith Marshall
.
.LP
This man page was written by Keith Marshall
<keithmarshall@users.sourceforge.net>
for the MinGW project.
It relates to the MinGW specific implementation of
.BR catgets (@MAN3EXT@).
.
.LP
Permission is granted to copy and redistribute this man page,
either
.IR "as is" ,
or in modified form,
under the terms of the
.IR "GNU Free Documentation License" ,
Version 1.2,
or any later version published by the
.IR "Free Software Foundation, Inc." ,
with no front cover texts,
no back cover texts,
and no invariant sections.
Please refer to
.I http://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html#FDL
for further information.
