'\"
.TH catgets @MAN3EXT@ 19-Jun-2007 MinGW "MinGW Programming Reference
.
.SH NAME
.B catgets
\- retrieve message text from a national language catalogue
.
.\" Copyright (C) 2007,  Keith Marshall.
.
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this manpage
.\" under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
.\" or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation, with
.\" no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
.\" A copy of the license is included in the accompanying file, `FDL'.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR #include
.RB < nl_types.h >
.LP
.BR "char *catgets" ( nl_catd
.IR catd ,
.BR int
.IR setnum ,
.BR int
.IR msgnum ,
.BI "const char *" \c
.IR msg )
.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Requires linking with the
.B \-lcatgets
library option.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR catgets ()
function searches in the national language message catalogue
specified by
.IR catd ,
which must have been opened by a preceding call to
.BR catopen (@MAN3EXT@),
for a message in set number
.IR setnum ,
which is identified by the message number
.IR msgnum .
If found,
.BR catgets ()
returns the text of this message;
the
.I msg
argument specifies a default message,
which is returned if the specified message cannot be found
in the catalogue.
.
.SH RETURN VALUE
If the specified message entry is successfully located in
the catalogue,
.BR catgets ()
returns a pointer to the null\-terminated string
defining the text of the message;
if the look\-up is unsuccessful,
.BR catgets ()
returns
.IR msg .
.
.SH ERROR RETURNS
None.
.
.SH CONFORMING TO
POSIX 1003.1-2001.
.
.SH CAVEATS AND BUGS
Text retrieved from a message catalogue is located within
an internal buffer allocated by
.BR catopen (@MAN3EXT@);
it must not be modified by the calling procedure.
.
.LP
The encoding format for message text is defined at the time
the catalogue is compiled by
.BR gencat (@MAN1EXT@).
Nominally,
it may be expected to conform to the
.B LC_MESSAGES
encoding for the active locale,
as established by
.BR setlocale (@MAN3EXT@);
however,
this cannot be easily confirmed by the function calling
.BR catgets ().
Therefore,
the calling procedure should assume that
the returned text matches the locale encoding;
if the message catalogue is known to employ Unicode encoding,
then the calling procedure should process the returned message
as a Unicode string.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR catopen (@MAN3EXT@),
.BR gencat (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.SH AUTHOR
Copyright \(co 2007, Keith Marshall
.
.LP
This man page was written by Keith Marshall
<keithmarshall@users.sourceforge.net>
for the MinGW project.
It relates to the MinGW specific implementation of
.BR catgets ().
.
.LP
Permission is granted to copy and redistribute this man page,
either
.IR "as is" ,
or in modified form,
under the terms of the
.IR "GNU Free Documentation License" ,
Version 1.2,
or any later version published by the
.IR "Free Software Foundation, Inc." ,
with no front cover texts,
no back cover texts,
and no invariant sections.
Please refer to
.I http://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html#FDL
for further information.
