'\"
.TH catopen @MAN3EXT@ 21-Jun-2007 MinGW "MinGW Programming Reference
.
.SH NAME
.B catopen
\- open a national language message catalogue.
.
.\" Copyright (C) 2007,  Keith Marshall.
.
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this manpage
.\" under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
.\" or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation, with
.\" no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
.\" A copy of the license is included in the accompanying file, `FDL'.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR #include
.RB < nl_types.h >
.LP
.BR "nl_catd catopen" ( "const char *" \c
.IR name ,
.BR int
.IR flag )
.
.SH AVAILABILITY
Requires linking with the
.B \-lcatgets
library option.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR catopen ()
function opens a national language message catalogue,
and returns a catalogue descriptor.
Once a message catalogue has been successfully opened,
its descriptor remains valid until explicitly closed by calling
.BR catclose (@MAN3EXT@),
or until the process image is replaced by calling
.BR exec ();
it is
.I never
inherited by any child process invoked by
.BR spawn ()
or by
.BR CreateProcess ().
.
.LP
The
.I name
argument specifies the name of the facility
to which the message catalogue relates.
If it includes a disk drive designator,
any
.BR / " or any " \e
directory/file name separator characters,
then it is assumed to represent an actual path name
for the message catalogue;
otherwise the message catalogue is located by searching
the paths specified by the
.B NLSPATH
environment variable,
substituting
.I name
for the
.B %N
translation specifier.
If no
.B NLSPATH
variable exists in the environment,
or if no message catalogue matching
.I name
is found in any path specified by it,
an internally defined default
.B NLSPATH
is searched.
.
.LP
The
.I flag
argument specifies how
.B NLSPATH
should be interpreted,
when searching for the named message catalogue;
it may be specified as the manifest constant
.BR NL_CAT_LOCALE ,
defined in
.BR nl_types.h ,
or it should be zero.
.
.LP
When searching
.BR NLSPATH ,
either as specified in the environment,
or using the internal default,
the selection of a message catalogue may depend on the
specification for the current locale,
as defined in the environment;
such selection is derived from the definition of
.BR LC_MESSAGES ,
if the
.I flag
argument is given as
.BR NL_CAT_LOCALE ,
or from
.B LANG
otherwise,
and is determined by substitution of the appropriate
components of the respective definition for each of the following
.B NLSPATH
translation specifiers:\(en
.ll -\n(INu
.
.RS
.TP
.B %l
The language specification component
of the locale identification string.
.
.TP
.B %t
The country/territory component
of the locale identification string.
.
.TP
.B %c
The codeset specification component
of the locale identification string.
.
.TP
.B %L
The entire locale identification;
nominally equivalent to
.BR %l_%t.%c .
.RE
.
.ll +\n(INu
.SH RETURN VALUE
If the requested message catalogue is successfully opened,
.BR catopen ()
returns a unique descriptor,
which remains associated with the catalogue for as long
as it remains open.
.
.SH ERROR RETURNS
If the requested catalogue cannot be successfully opened,
.BR catopen ()
returns
.RB ( nl_catd )( -1 ),
(which is
.I never
returned as a valid descriptor),
and
.I errno
is set to one of the following values:\(en
.ll -\n(INu
.
.RS
.TP
.B EACCESS
The user is not permitted to read the message catalogue
associated with the facility specified by
.IR name .
.
.TP
.B EMFILE
The calling process has too many open files.
.
.TP
.B ENOENT
No message catalogue,
associated with the facility specified by
.IR name ,
could be found.
.
.TP
.B ENOMEM
There is insufficient free memory available.
.ll +\n(INu
.RE
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NLSPATH
Specifies a list of semicolon separated path names,
by which a message catalogue may be identified.
It may include any,
or all of the following translation specifiers,
in any combination:\(en
.ll -\n(INu
.
.RS
.TP
.B %N
The message catalogue facility name.
.
.TP
.B %l
The language component of the locale specification string.
.
.TP
.B %t
The territory,
or region,
component of the locale specification string.
.
.TP
.B %c
The codeset component of the locale specification string.
.
.TP
.B %L
The fully qualified locale specification string.
.ll +\n(INu
.RE
.
.TP
.B LC_MESSAGES
The locale specification string,
used to establish the
.B NLSPATH
translations for
.BR %l ,
.BR %t ,
.B  %c
and
.BR %L ,
when the
.I flag
argument to
.BR catopen ()
is specified as
.BR NL_CAT_LOCALE .
.
.TP
.B LANG
The locale specification string,
used to establish the
.B NLSPATH
translations for
.BR %l ,
.BR %t ,
.B  %c
and
.BR %L ,
when the
.I flag
argument to
.BR catopen ()
is specified as zero.
.
.SH CONFORMING TO
POSIX 1003.1-2001,
but omitting the reporting of error conditions
which are unsupported by MS\(hyWindows\*(Tm.
.
.SH CAVEATS AND BUGS
When performing an
.B NLSPATH
search,
the strings substituted for the
.BR %l ,
.BR %t ,
.B  %c
and
.B  %L
translation specifiers are copied literally from the
.B  LC_MESSAGES
or
.B  LANG
environment variables,
as appropriate.
If the requisite environment variable is not defined,
then the substitution will be performed on the basis of the
locale identification string for the system
.B LC_CTYPE
category,
(since MS\(hyWindows\*(Tm does not provide native support for the
.B LC_MESSAGES
category),
as returned by
.BR setlocale (@MAN3EXT@);
this will be the long form locale identification string,
which is standard for MS\(hyWindows\*(Tm systems.
If your system uses POSIX conventions for storing message catalogues,
with national language directory names specified as ISO\(hy639 language
or ISO\(hy3166 territory codes,
be sure to set the requisite
.B LC_MESSAGES
or
.B LANG
environment variable accordingly.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR catgets (@MAN3EXT@),
.BR catclose (@MAN3EXT@).
.
.SH AUTHOR
Copyright \(co 2007, Keith Marshall
.
.LP
This man page was written by Keith Marshall
<keithmarshall@users.sourceforge.net>
for the MinGW project.
It relates to the MinGW specific implementation of
.BR catgets (@MAN3EXT@).
.
.LP
Permission is granted to copy and redistribute this man page,
either
.IR "as is" ,
or in modified form,
under the terms of the
.IR "GNU Free Documentation License" ,
Version 1.2,
or any later version published by the
.IR "Free Software Foundation, Inc." ,
with no front cover texts,
no back cover texts,
and no invariant sections.
Please refer to
.I http://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html#FDL
for further information.
