'\"
.TH gencat @MAN3EXT@ 16-Jul-2007 MinGW "MinGW User Commands
.
.SH NAME
.B gencat
\- compile a national language message catalogue for use with
.BR catgets (@MAN3EXT@).
.
.\" Copyright (C) 2007,  Keith Marshall.
.
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this manpage
.\" under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
.\" or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation, with
.\" no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
.\" A copy of the license is included in the accompanying file, `FDL'.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gencat
.I catfile
.I msgfile
\&...
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gencat
merges the messages defined in the input file,
or files,
specified by the
.I msgfile
argument list into the binary format national language message catalogue
specified by
.IR catfile .
.
.LP
If
.I catfile
does not exist,
it is created;
if it is specified as
.BR \- ,
or as the special device name
.BR /dev/stdout ,
then the message catalogue is treated as non\(hyexistent,
and it is created by writing the compiled message data to
standard output.
.
.LP
Input files in the
.I msgfile
list are processed in left to right order,
as specified.
If any file name in this
list is specified as
.BR \- ,
or as the special device name
.BR /dev/stdin ,
then standard input is read as the corresponding
.IR msgfile ;
at most one
.I msgfile
should be specified using either of these special
input file names,
in any single invocation of
.BR gencat .
.
.SS Message Catalogue Organisation
Typically,
a collection of message catalogues,
comprising one catalogue for each national language,
will be provided for a single
.IR facility ,
(where a
.I facility
may represent a single application,
or a single logical group of applications).
.
.LP
Within each individual catalogue,
messages are individually numbered,
and organised into numbered
.IR sets ,
such that each message is uniquely identified by
the combination of its set and message numbers;
these are indexed,
to facilitate retrieval of any specific message by the
.BR catgets (@MAN3EXT@)
function.
Within each multilingual collection of message catalogues,
relating to a common
.IR facility ,
each specific combination of set and message numbers refers to
the various national language translations for the same message.
.
.LP
Message text is incorporated into the message catalogues
in the form of NUL terminated strings;
these may be defined using any codeset which may be
appropriate for the respective national language of
each individual message catalogue.
.
.SS Input File Syntax
.B gencat
input files define both the organisation and content
of a message catalogue.
They are
.I text
files,
with individual lines delimited by either
.B LF
or
.B CRLF
line terminators;
every line of input
.I must
be properly terminated,
by either of these line terminators.
.
.LP
Each line of input must represent one of the input record types:\(en
.ll -4n
.
.RS 4n
.TP 4n
.IR "\fB$\fP comment" " ..."
Lines having
.B $
as their first character,
followed by one or more white space characters,
and then any additional characters up to and
including the line terminator,
are considered as comments.
They are parsed in the POSIX locale,
(with conversion of the input encoding from
UTF\(hy16 or UTF\(hy32 if required).
With the execption of the special case of a
.I codeset
declaration,
such comment lines are simply ignored.
.
.TP
.BR "$ codeset" = \fIencoding
This special use of a
.B comment
line is an extension to the POSIX standard.
It functions as a pseudo\(hydirective,
which provides a mechanism for specifying the codeset in which
messages are to be defined,
when this differs from the prevailing codeset
of the language specified for the
.B LC_CTYPE
category of the locale established in the process environment.
This feature is not supported
when the input encoding is implicitly identified as
UTF\(hy16 or UTF\(hy32.
.
.TP
.IR \fB$ < \fBdirective "> " argument " [" comment " ...]"
Lines having
.B $
as their first character,
followed immediately by a directive keyword,
with no intervening white space,
are interpreted as
.B gencat
directives.
The valid directives are:\(en
.ll -4n
.
.RS 4n
.TP 4n
.IR \fB$quote " [<" char ">]"
Identifies a single character,
which is to be interpreted as an optional quoting character,
while parsing subsequent message definitions.
.
.IP
The optional
.RI < char >
argument must represent a single character;
it is interpreted,
possibly as a multi\(hybyte character,
in the input encoding,
which may be implicitly identified as
UTF\(hy16 or UTF\(hy32,
explicitly specified by a
.I codeset
pseudo\(hydirective,
or,
failing either of these,
in the encoding for the
.B LC_CTYPE
category of the locale defined in the
.B gencat
process environment.
This character may be used,
in strict matching pairs,
to surround sections of text within message definitions,
so improving the visibility of trailing white space,
or of empty message definitions,
within the source file;
such pairs of the quote character are
.I not
copied to the message definition in the message catalogue.
.
.IP
If a
.B $quote
directive is issued,
from which the
.RI < char >
argument is omitted,
or if no
.B $quote
directive is specified,
then no quoting character is available
for use in subsequent message definitions.
.
.TP
.IR \fB$set " <" setnum "> [" comment ]
Identifies the set number,
.IR setnum ,
to which subsequently defined messages are to be added,
until the next
.B $set
directive,
or until the end of the source file.
The
.I setnum
argument must represent a decimal integer number in the range from
.B 1
to the value of the manifest constant
.BR NL_SETMAX ,
which is defined in
.IR nl_types.h .
.
.IP
Within any single source file,
set numbers defined by
.B $set
directives must be presented in strictly ascending order,
but they need not be contiguously numbered.
.
.IP
If any source file presents message definitions
before the first of any
.B $set
directives,
or if no
.B $set
directive is present,
then those messages are added to
the set identified by the manifest constant
.BR NL_SETD ,
which is defined in
.IR nl_types.h .
.
.TP
.IR \fB$delset " <" setnum "> [" comment ]
Instructs
.B gencat
to remove all messages,
belonging to the set identified by
.IR setnum ,
from an existing message catalogue.
.RE
.
.TP
.RI < \fBmsgnum "> " "message text" " ... [" \fB\e ]
Lines commencing with a numeric
.B msgnum
tag introduce a new message definition.
The
.B msgnum
tag must be composed of decimal digits from the POSIX portable character set,
converted from UTF\(hy16 or UTF\(hy32 encoding as necessary,
when either of these is used for input,
and must represent a decimal integer number in the range from
.B 1
to the value of the manifest constant
.BR NL_MSGMAX ,
which is defined in
.IR nl_types.h .
It must be separated from the following
.I message text
by exactly one space character;
any additional spaces,
where present,
are significant and are considered to be part of the defined
.IR "message text" .
.
.IP
Within any single message set,
as presented within any single source file,
.B msgnum
records
.I must
be presented in strictly ascending numerical order of
.BR msgnum ;
however,
the message numbers need not be contiguous.
.
.IP
The
.I message text
is interpreted using the encoding of the input stream,
which may be implicitly identified as
UTF\(hy16 or UTF\(hy32,
explicitly specified by a
.I codeset
pseudo\(hydirective,
or,
where neither of these is applicable,
using the encoding for the
.B LC_CTYPE
category of the locale defined in the
.B gencat
process environment.
.
.IP
Within
.IR "message text" ,
the following escape sequences are recognised,
and interpreted in place,
before copying to the message catalogue:\(en
.ll -4n
.
.RS 8n
.TP 9n
.B \eb
backspace.
.
.TP
.B \ef
form feed.
.
.TP
.B \en
newline.
.
.TP
.B \er
carriage return.
.
.TP
.B \et
horizontal tab.
.
.TP
.B \ev
vertical tab.
.
.TP
.B \e\e
a single literal
.B \e
character.
.
.TP
.BR \e < ddd >
octal digit sequence;
the arbitrary length sequence of octal digit characters,
.BR ddd ,
is parsed,
interpreted as the numeric value represented,
and replaced by the single character associated with the corresponding
position in the collating sequence of the input codeset.
.ll +4n
.RE
.
.IP
In addition to the above escape sequences,
if the
.I last
character of
.IR "message text" ,
immediately preceding the
.B LF
or
.B CRLF
line terminator,
is an unescaped
.B \e
character,
or if
.I message text
includes an unpaired instance of the quoting character,
as defined by the
.B $quote
directive,
then the following line is interpreted as a continuation of
.IR "message text" .
.
.IP
When followed by any character,
other than those specified for the above escape sequences,
or the line terminator,
any
.B \e
character appearing in
.I message text
is ignored;
it is not included in the collected
.I message text
which is to be copied to the message catalogue.
.
.IP
If
.B msgnum
is followed by
.I exactly
one white space character,
and immediately thereafter by a
.B LF
or a
.B CRLF
line terminator,
then a zero length message will be entered into the message catalogue.
.
.IP
If
.B msgnum
is immediately followed by a
.B LF
or
.B CRLF
line terminator,
without intervening white space,
then any message in the current message set,
and with the specified message number,
which already exists in the message catalogue,
will be deleted.
.
.TP
.IR "continuation message text" " ... [" \fB\e ]
Any line,
immediately following a message definition record which ends with a
.B \e
escaped
.B LF
or
.B CRLF
terminator,
or which includes an unpaired quoting character,
is parsed as a logical continuation of the message definition;
such continuation may be extended over as many lines as required,
by similarly escaping the line terminator
on each continuation line but the last,
or by deferring the matching of an unpaired quoting character
until the last continuation line.
.
.IP
When a message definition is extended over one or more continuation lines,
the intervening line terminators are not included in the collected
.IR "message text" .
Thus,
each of the following two examples:\(en
.
.nf
.RS
.IP
$quote "
1 Message defined \e
with continuation line.\en
.
.IP
$quote "
1 "Message defined
\ with continuation line.\en"
.RE
.IP
is equivalent to:\(en
.RS
.IP
$quote "
1 Message defined with continuation line.\en
.RE
.fi
.RE
.ll +8n
.
.LP
All
.IR "message text" ,
from each
.B msgnum
definition line and its following continuation lines,
if any,
is interpreted and collected into a single logical message definition.
Each such definition is indexed by
.B setnum
and
.B msgnum
for subsequent retrieval by any application
accessing the message catalogue by calling
.BR catopen (@MAN3EXT@)
and
.BR catgets (@MAN3EXT@),
and is stored in the message catalogue as a NUL terminated string.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables may be set,
to control the operation of
.BR gencat :\(en
.ll -4n
.
.TP 4n
.B LC_ALL
If set
.B LC_ALL
defines the language,
territory and encoding attributes to be associated with the
.B LC_CTYPE
and
.B LC_MESSAGE
locale categories.
.
.TP
.B LC_CTYPE
If
.B LC_ALL
is not defined,
the encoding attribute from the locale category defined by
.B LC_CTYPE
is used to establish the default codeset for the message catalogue,
when the input encoding cannot be identified as either UTF\(hy16 or UTF\(hy32,
and there is no
.B codeset
pseudo\(hydirective specified in the input stream.
.
.TP
.B LC_MESSAGES
If
.B LC_ALL
is not defined,
.B LC_MESSAGES
defines the language,
territory and encoding attributes identifying a message catalogue,
in which
.BR gencat \(aqs
own diagnostic messages are defined.
.
.TP
.B NLSPATH
Defines the search path used to locate message catalogues,
in which
.BR gencat \(aqs
own diagnostic messages are defined.
.B NLSPATH
should be a semicolon separated list of directory paths,
in the format required by
.BR catopen (@MAN3EXT@).
.
.SH CONFORMING TO
POSIX 1003.1-2001.
.
.SH CAVEATS AND BUGS
Neither the automatic detection of UTF\(hy16 or UTF\(hy32
input encoding formats,
nor the use of the
.B codeset
pseudo\(hydirective to specify message catalogue encoding,
is mandated by POSIX.
While some other
.B gencat
implementations are known to support the
.B codeset
pseudo\(hydirective,
neither of these features is guaranteed to be portable.
.
.LP
Similarly,
the use of unpaired quoting characters to extend message definitions,
over one or more continuation lines,
is an extension to POSIX requirements,
and may not be portable to other
.B gencat
implementations.
.
.LP
POSIX requires that no individual message shall be greater in length
than the value of the manifest constant
.BR NL_TEXTMAX ,
which is defined in
.IR nl_types.h ;
this implementation does not enforce this limitation.
.
.LP
POSIX stipulates that the manifest constants
.BR NL_SETMAX ,
.B  NL_MSGMAX
and
.BR NL_TEXTMAX ,
should be defined in
.IR limits.h ;
this implementation defines them in
.I nl_types.h
instead.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR catopen (@MAN3EXT@),
.BR catgets (@MAN3EXT@),
.BR catclose (@MAN3EXT@).
.
.SH AUTHOR
Copyright \(co 2007, Keith Marshall
.
.LP
This man page was written by Keith Marshall
<keithmarshall@users.sourceforge.net>
for the MinGW project.
It relates to the MinGW specific implementation of
.BR catgets (@MAN3EXT@).
.
.LP
Permission is granted to copy and redistribute this man page,
either
.IR "as is" ,
or in modified form,
under the terms of the
.IR "GNU Free Documentation License" ,
Version 1.2,
or any later version published by the
.IR "Free Software Foundation, Inc." ,
with no front cover texts,
no back cover texts,
and no invariant sections.
Please refer to
.I http://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html#FDL
for further information.
