@c Copyright (C) 1996-2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gpc.texi.
@c This file is part of the GPC Manual.
@c
@c Authors: Peter Gerwinski <peter@gerwinski.de>
@c          Frank Heckenbach <frank@pascal.gnu.de>
@c
@c Last modification: 2002-05-10 (file up to date)

@node Keywords
@chapter Pascal keywords and operators supported by GNU Pascal.

This chapter lists all keywords understood by GNU Pascal.

By default, keywords can be redefined to make it possible that every
correct ISO 7185 program can be compiled. However, you can use the
compiler dialect switches (e.g., @code{--extended-pascal} or
@code{--borland-pascal}) to tell GPC that keywords of a given
standard must not be redefined.

The keywords are taken from the following standards:

@itemize @bullet
@item
ISO 7185 Pascal (SP)
@item
ISO 10206 Extended Pascal (EP)
@item
ANSI draft Object Pascal (OP)
@item
USCD Pascal (USCD)
@item
Borland Pascal 7.0 (BP)
@item
Borland Delphi (BD)
@item
Pascal-SC (PXSC, Pascal eXtensions for Scientific Calculations)
@item
VAX Pascal (VP)
@item
GNU Pascal extensions (GPC)
@end itemize

In GPC you are free to re-define everything that is not a reserved
word in ISO 7185 Pascal in your program or the dialect selected.
E.g., you do not have to modify your code for GPC if you have an
identifier like @code{Restricted} or @code{Value} or some such,
unless you compile with the @samp{--extended-pascal} option.

The following table lists all known keywords with short
descriptions. The links point to the longer descriptions in the
reference.

@include keyword.texi
