@c Generated automatically from system.pas
@c DO NOT CHANGE THIS FILE MANUALLY!

@example
@{ BP and partly Delphi compatible System unit for GPC

  This unit is released as part of the GNU Pascal project. It
  implements some rather exotic BP and Delphi compatibility
  features. Even many BP and Delphi programs don't need them, but
  they're here for maximum compatibility. Most of BP's and Delphi's
  System units' features are built into the compiler or the RTS.

  Note: The things in this unit are really exotic. If you haven't
  used BP or Delphi before, you don't want to look at this unit. :-)

  This unit depends on the conditional defines @samp{__BP_TYPE_SIZES__},
  @samp{__BP_RANDOM__} and @samp{__BP_PARAMSTR_0__}.

  If @samp{__BP_TYPE_SIZES__} is defined (with the @samp{-D__BP_TYPE_SIZES__}
  option), the integer data types will be redefined to the sizes
  they have in BP or Delphi. Note that this might cause problems,
  e.g. when passing var parameters of integer types between units
  that do and don't use System. However, of the BP compatibility
  units, only Dos and WinDos use such parameters, and they have been
  taken care of so they work.

  If @samp{__BP_RANDOM__} is defined (@samp{-D__BP_RANDOM__}), this unit will
  provide an exactly BP compatible pseudo random number generator.
  In particular, the range for integer randoms will be truncated to
  16 bits like in BP. The RandSeed variable is provided, and if it's
  set to the same value as BP's RandSeed, it produces exactly the
  same sequence of pseudo random numbers that BP's pseudo random
  number generator does (whoever might need this ... ;-). Even the
  Randomize function will behave exactly like in BP. However, this
  will not be noted unless one explicitly tests for it.

  If @samp{__BP_PARAMSTR_0__} is defined (@samp{-D__BP_PARAMSTR_0__}), this
  unit will change the value of @samp{ParamStr (0)} to that of
  @samp{ExecutablePath}, overwriting the value actually passed by the
  caller, to imitate BP's/Dos's behaviour. However *note*: On most
  systems, @samp{ExecutablePath} is *not* guaranteed to return the full
  path, so defining this symbol doesn't change anything. In general,
  you *cannot* expect to find the full executable path, so better
  don't even try it, or your program will (at best) run on some
  systems. For most cases where BP programs access their own
  executable, there are cleaner alternatives available.

  Copyright (C) 1998-2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

  Authors: Peter Gerwinski <peter@@gerwinski.de>
           Prof. Abimbola A. Olowofoyeku <African_Chief@@bigfoot.com>
           Frank Heckenbach <frank@@pascal.gnu.de>
           Dominik Freche <dominik.freche@@gmx.net>

  This file is part of GNU Pascal.

  GNU Pascal is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published
  by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your
  option) any later version.

  GNU Pascal is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
  WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
  General Public License for more details.

  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
  along with GNU Pascal; see the file COPYING. If not, write to the
  Free Software Foundation, 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA
  02111-1307, USA.

  As a special exception, if you link this file with files compiled
  with a GNU compiler to produce an executable, this does not cause
  the resulting executable to be covered by the GNU General Public
  License. This exception does not however invalidate any other
  reasons why the executable file might be covered by the GNU
  General Public License. @}

@{$gnu-pascal,I-@}
@{$if __GPC_RELEASE__ < 20020225@}
@{$error This unit requires GPC release 20020225 or newer.@}
@{$endif@}

unit System;

interface

import GPC (MaxLongInt => GPC_MaxLongInt);

var
  @{ Chain of procedures to be executed at the end of the program @}
  ExitProc: ^procedure = nil;

  @{ Contains all the command line arguments passed to the program,
    concatenated, with spaces between them @}
  CmdLine: CString;

  @{$ifdef __BP_RANDOM__@}
  @{ Random seed, initialized by Randomize, but can also be set
    explicitly @}
  RandSeed: Integer (32) = 0;
  @{$endif@}

type
  OrigInt = Integer;
  OrigWord = Word;

  @{ needed in the Dos unit @}
  Int7 = Integer (7);
  Word16 = Word (16);
  Word32 = Word (32);

  @{ Delphi @}
  SmallInt = Integer  (16);
  DWord    = Cardinal (32);

  @{ Short BP compatible type sizes if wanted @}
  @{$ifdef __BP_TYPE_SIZES__@}
  ByteBool = Boolean  (8);
  WordBool = Boolean  (16);
  LongBool = Boolean  (32);
  Boolean  = ByteBool;      @{ important in packed records and arrays
  @}
  ShortInt = Integer  (8);
  Byte     = Cardinal (8);
  Word     = Cardinal (16);
  LongInt  = Integer  (32);
  Comp     = Integer  (64);
  LongWord = Cardinal (32);  @{ Delphi @}
  Integer  = Integer  (16);
  @{$endif@}

  @{$if False@}  @{ @@@@ doesn't work well (dialec3.pas) -- when GPC gets
  short
                    strings, it will be unnecessary @}
  @{$ifdef __BORLAND_PASCAL__@}
  String = String [255];
  @{$endif@}
  @{$endif@}

const
  MaxInt     = High (Integer);
  MaxLongInt = High (LongInt);

@{ Return the lowest-order byte of x @}
function  Lo (x: LongestInt): Byte; asmname '_p_Lo';

@{ Return the lowest-but-one-order byte of x @}
function  Hi (x: LongestInt): Byte; asmname '_p_Hi';

@{ Swap the lowest- and lowest-but-one-order bytes, mask out the
  higher ones @}
function  Swap (x: LongestInt): Word; asmname '_p_Swap';

@{ Store the current directory name (on the given drive number if
  drive <> 0) in s @}
procedure GetDir (Drive: Byte; var s: String); asmname '_p_GetDir';

@{ Dummy routine for compatibility. @@@@Use two overloaded versions
  rather than varargs when possible. @}
procedure SetTextBuf (var f: Text; var Buf; ...);
  asmname '_p_SetTextBuf';

@{ Mostly useless BP compatible variables @}
var
  SelectorInc: Word = $1000;
  Seg0040: Word = $40;
  SegA000: Word = $a000;
  SegB000: Word = $b000;
  SegB800: Word = $b800;
  Test8086: Byte = 2;
  Test8087: Byte = 3;  @{ floating-point arithmetic is emulated
                         transparently by the OS if not present
                         in hardware @}
  OvrCodeList: Word = 0;
  OvrHeapSize: Word = 0;
  OvrDebugPtr: Pointer = nil;
  OvrHeapOrg: Word = 0;
  OvrHeapPtr: Word = 0;
  OvrHeapEnd: Word = 0;
  OvrLoadList: Word = 0;
  OvrDosHandle: Word = 0;
  OvrEmsHandle: Word = $ffff;
  HeapOrg: Pointer absolute HeapBegin;
  HeapPtr: Pointer absolute HeapHigh;
  HeapEnd: Pointer = Pointer (High (PtrCard));
  FreeList: Pointer = nil;
  FreeZero: Pointer = nil;
  StackLimit: Word = 0;
  HeapList: Word = 0;
  HeapLimit: Word = 1024;
  HeapBlock: Word = 8192;
  HeapAllocFlags: Word = 2;
  CmdShow: Integer = 0;
  SaveInt00: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt02: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt0C: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt0D: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt1B: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt21: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt23: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt24: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt34: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt35: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt36: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt37: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt38: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt39: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt3A: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt3B: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt3C: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt3D: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt3E: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt3F: Pointer = nil;
  SaveInt75: Pointer = nil;
  RealModeRegs: array [0 .. 49] of Byte =
    (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
     0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
     0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0);

@{ Mostly useless BP compatible pointer functions @}
function  Ofs (const X): PtrWord; asmname '_p_Ofs';
function  Seg (const X): PtrWord; asmname '_p_Seg';
function  Ptr (Seg, Ofs: PtrWord): Pointer; asmname '_p_Ptr';
function  CSeg: PtrWord; asmname '_p_CSeg';
function  DSeg: PtrWord; asmname '_p_DSeg';
function  SSeg: PtrWord; asmname '_p_SSeg';
function  SPtr: PtrWord; asmname '_p_SPtr';

@{ Routines to handle BP's 6 byte @samp{Real} type which is formatted like
  this:

  47                                                   0
  -|------- -------- -------- -------- --------|--------
   |                                           |
   +----------+                   +------------+
  47 Sign Bit |  8..46 Mantissa   | 0..7 Biased Exponent

  This format does not support infinities, NaNs and denormalized
  numbers. The first digit after the binary point is not stored and
  assumed to be 1. (This is called the normalized representation of
  a binary floating point number.)

  In GPC, this type is represented by the type @samp{BPReal} which is
  binary compatible to BP's type, and can therefore be used in
  connection with binary files used by BP programs.

  The functions @samp{RealToBPReal} and @samp{BPRealToReal} convert between
  this type and GPC's @samp{Real} type. Apart from that, @samp{BPReal} should
  be treated as opaque.

  The variables @samp{BPRealIgnoreOverflow} and @samp{BPRealIgnoreUnderflow}
  determine what to do in the case of overflows and underflows. The
  default values are BP compatible. @}

var
  @{ Ignore overflows, and use the highest possible value instead. @}
  BPRealIgnoreOverflow: Boolean = False;

  @{ Ignore underflows, and use 0 instead. This is BP's behaviour,
    but has the disadvantage of diminishing computation precision. @}
  BPRealIgnoreUnderflow: Boolean = True;

type
  BPReal = record
    Format: array [1 .. 6] of Cardinal (8)
  end;

function RealToBPReal (R: Real): BPReal; asmname '_p_RealToBPReal';
function BPRealToReal (const BR: BPReal): Real;
  asmname '_p_BPRealToReal';

@{ Heap management stuff @}

const
  @{ Possible return values for HeapError @}
  HeapErrorRunError = 0;
  HeapErrorNil      = 1;
  HeapErrorRetry    = 2;

var
  @{ If assigned to a function, it will be called when memory
    allocations do not find enough free memory. Its return value
    determines if a run time error should be raised (the default),
    or nil should be returned, or the allocation should be retried
    (causing the routine to be called again if the allocation still
    doesn't succeed).

    Notes:

    - Returning nil can cause some routines of the RTS and units
      (shipped with GPC or third-party) to crash when they don't
      expect nil, so better don't use this mechanism, but rather
      CGetMem where needed.

    - Letting the allocation be retried, of course, only makes sense
      if the routine freed some memory before -- otherwise it will
      cause an infinite loop! So, a meaningful HeapError routine
      should dispose of some temporary objects, if available, and
      return HeapErrorRetry, and return HeapErrorRunError when no
      (more) of them are available. @}
  HeapError: ^function (Size: Word): Integer = nil;

@{ Just returns HeapErrorNil. When this function is assigned to
  HeapError, GetMem and New will return a nil pointer instead of
  causing a runtime error when the allocation fails. See the comment
  for HeapError above. @}
function  HeapErrorNilReturn (Size: Word): Integer;
  asmname '_p_HeapErrorNilReturn';

@{ Return the total free memory/biggest free memory block. Except
  under Win32 and DJGPP, these are expensive routines -- try to
  avoid them. Under Win32, MaxAvail returns the same as MemAvail, so
  don't rely on being able to allocate a block of memory as big as
  MaxAvail indicates. Generally it's preferable to not use these
  functions at all in order to do a safe allocation, but just try to
  allocate the memory needed using CGetMem, and check for a nil
  result. What makes these routines unrealiable is, e.g., that on
  multi-tasking systems, another process may allocate memory after
  you've called MemAvail/MaxAvail and before you get to do the next
  allocation. Also, please note that some systems over-commit
  virtual memory which may cause MemAvail to return a value larger
  than the actual (physical plus swap) memory available. Therefore,
  if you want to be "sure" (modulo the above restrictions) that the
  memory is actually available, use MaxAvail. @}
function  MemAvail: Cardinal; asmname '_p_MemAvail';
function  MaxAvail: Cardinal; asmname '_p_MaxAvail';

@{ Delphi compatibility @}

function  CompToDouble (x: Comp): Double; asmname '_p_CompToDouble';
function  DoubleToComp (x: Double): Comp; asmname '_p_DoubleToComp';
function  AllocMemCount: Integer; asmname '_p_AllocMemCount';
function  AllocMemSize: SizeType; asmname '_p_AllocMemSize';
procedure Assert (Condition: Boolean); asmname '_p_Assert';
procedure DefaultAssertErrorProc (const Message, FileName: String;
  LineNumber: Integer; ErrorAddr: Pointer);
  asmname '_p_DefaultAssertErrorProc';

var
  AssertErrorProc: ^procedure (const Message, FileName: String;
  LineNumber: Integer; ErrorAddr: Pointer) =
  @@DefaultAssertErrorProc;
  NoErrMsg: Boolean = False;

@end example
